# R Code generating main figures of the paper

### Figure 1: Using blood RNA-seq to study rare disease genes. a: Disease categories of sequenced affected patients. The majority of cases belong to neurology (n=40), musculoskeletal and orthopedics( n=8), hematology (n=8) and ophthalmology (n=8) categories. b: Percentage of disease genes (from curated lists) expressed in blood. We used the median TPM across 909 DGN samples, 65 PIVUS samples and our 143 samples.
### Figure 2: Expression outliers in rare disease samples. a: Enrichment for case or control outlier genes in intolerance to LoF (red), missense (blue) and synonymous (yellow) mutations at different percentiles of gene expression. Represented here as the log odds ratio with 95% Wald confidence intervals using 931 samples. P-values were calculated based on the z -statistic. b Impact of Z-score thresholds on number of outliers. Differences between under and over expression outliers were tested using a two-sided Wilcoxon rang sum test. Vertical dashed lines indicate mean Z-score for n=1 and n=5 percentiles across all genes used in analysis (N = 14,988). For a and b: significance level: **** p-value≤1×10−4; *** p-value≤1×10−3; ** p-value≤1×10−2; * p-value≤5×10−2. c: Proportion of under-expression outlier genes remaining after filters (n=1,052). Adding genetic information (rare variant within 10kb upstream of the gene body) allows to filter down to 50% of the original set of outliers. Keeping only genes for which HPO information of the affected individual match helps narrow down to less than 10% of candidates. For b and c: Boxplots represent median value, with lower and upper hinges corresponding to the 25th and 75th percentiles, and lower and upper whiskers extend from the hinge to the smallest and largest value at most 1.5 * inter-quartile range of the hinge respectively. d: Number of candidate genes at each filter for all cases with genetic information (n=75). Average number of candidate genes and s.d are represented in black for each filter.


### Figure 3: Splicing outlier detection. a: Splicing outlier definition. Gene model is in green, rectangles represent 3 exons. In this model, we show junction information for one donor (D) and two acceptors(A1 and A2). For each sample for this gene we have coverage information for the two existing splicing junctions (D-A1 and D-A2). We defined the proportion of one splice junction as the number of reads overlapping this junction divided by the total number of reads spanning all junctions from a common donor (or acceptor). b: Number of genes with at least one splicing outlier at different Z-score thresholds (n=208 samples from PIVUS and rare disease cohorts). c: Number of rare variants in each sample, in total, nearby junction and associated with a splicing outlier (n=111 samples with genetic information). Rare variants were defined as variants with MAF≤0.1%. d: Impact of different filters on splicing outlier discoveries (n=75 cases with genetic information). e: We observed a significant increase (two-sided Wilcoxon test, p-value 9.8×10−5) in the median number of rare variants with CADD score≥10 in the gene when filtering outliers with a rare variant within 20 bp of the junction and relevant to the disease phenotype (HPO match). f: Number of candidate genes at each filter for all cases with genetic information (n=75). Mean value and s.d. are represented in black for each filter. For b and d and e: Boxplots represent median value, with lower and upper hinges corresponding to the 25th and 75th percentiles, and lower and upper whiskers extend from the hinge to the smallest and largest value at most 1.5 * inter-quartile range of the hinge respectively.

### Figure 4: Identification of disease gene through splicing outlier detection. a: Splicing outliers in the KCTD7 case. Number of candidate genes obtained throughout different filters using genetic data, splicing outlier data, and phenotypic data. Shape indicates if the causal gene is in the list. After filtering for splicing outliers with a deleterious rare splice variant within 20 bp of a splice junction and limiting the search to genes for which there is a link to phenotype (HPO match), 1 candidate gene was leftKCTD7. b: Sashimi plot of the case and 3 controls of the splicing gain region in KCTD7. For the case only (red track), we observed a new splicing junction ahead of the annotated one in exon 3. c:cDNA gel from fibroblast cDNA of exons 2-4 of KCTD7 for the proband, her affected sibling and three unaffected controls (no replicate is available). Both for the case and her affected brother we observed 2 fragments of different size, corresponding to the alternative splice products induced by the splice-gain mutation. In control samples, only one fragment is observed, corresponding to the original transcript.
